Unicode Language Entry
This microsite is intended to provide an overview to the options for entering unicode characters. Specifically, this grew out of working with Indigenous languages which have unicode support, but the actual data entry is a barrier to use.

The Basics
At the most basic level, we want to be able to type in language, and have whatever characters/letters we enter through our keyboard be accurately displayed to anyone who is receiving the text on their end. No missing characters, no distorted or broekn characters, no spacing or alignment problems.

Not only do we want the text to display accurately, we also want it to be usable in different contexts, eg:

Changing fonts doesn’t break the display.
Applying some styling, like bold or italics doesn’t break the display.
Other people don’t need to install any special software, fonts, or other tools to view the text properly (entering text may require some extra tools).
The text is properly displayed on different operating systems (Windows, MacOS, Android, iOS).
The text is properly displayed in different programs or software (eg: not limited to Microsoft programs).
This includes many moving parts, some of which are more striaghtforward than others.

What is unicode?
What about fonts?
Ideally, you would not need a special or custom font to properly display your characters - you could pick any font you like. And in many cases, it does work this way, but there are a few things to be aware of:

There are some languages that do use custom fonts because their characters are not included in unicode. This is not as common now as it used to be, and many languages that original used custom fonts have been added to unicode.
Not all fonts support the full range of unicode characters. While they could do so, font designers may save time by focusing on the most frequently used unicode sets. Even if all the characters are supported, they may not display properly - diacritics in particular might interact with the letters in non-ideal ways. It is always a good idea to test your fonts before committing to them. A short list of fonts with good character coverage is provided below.
Depending on the visual complexity of your characters, you may want to choose sans-serif fonts, since the extra ornamentation on serif fonts can make it more dificult to read.
Fonts worth considering
These fonts each may work better with some languages than others, and everyone will find different fonts visually appealing. Testing is still recommended, but this should be a good starting point.

BC Sans
Aboriginal Sans
Aboriginal Serif
Lucida Sans Unicode
Lucida Grande
Helvetica Neue
Helvetica
Arial
Use cases/examples
In order of least to most complexity:

Entirely English/Latin character set. No diacritics. No other characters.
Mostly English/Latin character set, with some diacritics. No other characters.
Mostly English/Latin character set, with some disacritings and some other characters.
Completely non-English/Latin character set. Eg: Cherokee, syllabic languages.
Options
Depending on the complexity

Keyboard install Mac
Keyboard install Windows
Manual input Mac
Manual input Windows
Character viewer Mac
Character viewer Windows
